we're from out mm 64 or NGC for eight to
six shears the black eye galaxy or the
evil eye galaxy it's a spiral you won't
see in the sky it's sort of halfway
between sort of bouquets and Leo but I
mean it's beautiful right it's
mesmerizing it's mysterious it has this
gorgeous dulling ground here which gives
it its name black our galaxy the reason
that it's got this cool dust feature is
because it's inclined towards us so
there's some of the light gets through
from the starch and from the up a bit
but down here where it's sort of
inclined and it's not going to dust to
get to us and so it's a lot of light
blocked and you get this really cool
dark mysterious feature there this one
does look a little bit more
3-dimensional than some of them it looks
like it's got like a bit of fluffiness
and boulders yeah actually so this is
what's called a flocculent spiral galaxy
which means fluffy so yeah you're right
Brady it does look fluffy and the reason
that you you can say that is because you
could just stare at this picture for as
long as you wanted but you could never
actually tell me how many spiral arms
were in that galaxy you can tell me it
was spiral but you couldn't tell me I
can see too or I can see three because
you can see hundreds you can see so many
that's why it's called flocculent this
kind of sloppiness which is nice but the
really interesting thing about this
galaxy is I mean it changed our views of
galaxy evolution series it changed sort
of the foundation of how we thought
galaxies were built up and not just from
sort of it stars that we can see here
but from its gas Mac in sort of the
early 90s people were really interested
in looking at how the stars and gas
moves in galaxies so this is what's
called kinematics they would try and see
if they could observe gas moving in
galaxies by seeing if it was red shifted
or blue shifted towards us so if a
galaxy is rotating you should see half
of the gasless stars are blue shifted
towards you and half the gases are red
shifted away from you and to do that
really clever way is to take lots and
lots of images it's really tiny bands of
wavelengths so you only let through a
little bit of this sort of spectrum of
light and so you take a lot
there's lots of little snapshots and
then you get this picture of which gas
is moving at which velocities and so
people did this in the early 90s with
this galaxy and they did it with neutral
hydrogens so neutral hydrogen gives off
at 21 centimeters so they used a radio
telescope and they got this really nice
picture of what the gas is doing in this
galaxy so what you can see is that it's
colored here to show you which direction
the gas is moving so the red color is
moving away from us and the blue is
moving towards us and some blue shift
and red shift and so you can see there's
this nice rotation that you would expect
from a spiral galaxy you'd expect spiral
they're rotating that's what you'd get
but if you look at this little zoomed in
area which is right in the center
actually this side instead of moving
away from us is colored blue coming
towards us and that side is red so that
bits moving away from us so this central
bit is rotating the opposite direction
to the rest of the galaxy exactly yes so
we call this a counter rotating core and
this is a spiral galaxy obviously as
well so a lot of people think spiral
galaxies they're kind of left to their
own devices you know they do whatever
they want they're pretty isolated
they're not really affected by the
galaxies and that's how they get this
beautiful spiral structure forming you
know it's never destroyed but the only
way that you can get this sort of
disturbance where you have this core
rotating differently to the rest of the
galaxy would be through something like a
merger so back in the 90s people were
like Oh what spiral galaxies can have
mergers - that's against everything that
they thought about how galaxies
evolution in galaxy formation worked
because it seems hard to imagine having
a merger without ruining your beautiful
design exactly yeah so when you have a
merger you know things are ripped apart
stuff thinks the center those beautiful
spiral things change but now you know
sort of like 2016-2017 we've shown with
simulations that you can actually have
two spirals yeah
so people have to sort of reconsider
everything they knew really this was the
first spiral that this was really
observed in the really interesting this
is just the gas so that's just how the
gas is moving you think I think how the
stars are moving as well two years later
after that study was published in comes
Vera Rubin now Vera Rubin she is like
The Godfather of all things rotation in
galaxies she was the one who first
observed how the speed of rotation in
the galaxy changes with its radius and
that was one of the first pieces of
evidence for dark matter you know so
this is this is one of the big dogs
wading into this right so she then took
observations of this galaxy to see how
the stars are moving so she took what's
called a long slit spectra so you
literally take a really really thin slit
and you put it over the entirety of your
galaxy and you take a spectra you split
the light and again it will be
redshifted different areas in different
places in the galaxy and so you can see
how the speed of the stars change and
what she found was that in the middle
the stars are going in the same
direction as the gas and that sort of
anti clockwise direction in the
outskirts there's going still in the
same direction as the stars in the
center but that means that they're going
opposite to the gas and it's the flow
against the flow exactly yes how do you
have this beautiful spiral structure of
a disk with stars going one way and gas
going the other and again this is added
to this idea that you you have to have
had some form of maybe a major merger
may be what we call a minor merger which
is where you have a smaller galaxy come
in and merge with a big galaxy or even
just like some form of accretion event
where you took something from the
outside and you added it to this galaxy
to stir it up basically and that was of
yet it was the first time as I said like
in spiral galaxies that this you know
people had even considered that that
could happen but they weren't just
isolated and left to form these
beautiful grand designs so this is
obviously one example of this right so
you know you don't just want the sort of
oddity in the collection and so
or people now are focusing on big
surveys to find more of these things to
be happy know how common it was we've
realized through the years that actually
spirals can form for mergers and things
like that and so we really want to study
these kinematics more closely and so
they're surveys of like tens of
thousands of galaxies going on now that
for each galaxy they take 100 odd
spectra from various different places
and then they can get the kinematics and
the movement of both the stars and the
gas and so we can look sort of
statistically across a big population of
galaxies what is going on with these
movements of stars and gas to form these
things and you know what's going on in
their lifetimes to make them the way
that they are yeah so it's always been
called the black eye of the evil eye but
in terms of the Aruban she decided that
that you know wasn't a nice name for
this galaxy it was too beautiful and it
needed a new name and so she dubbed it
the sleeping beauty galaxy in the hope
that other people would also start
calling in that as well
she said I hence choose to rename it the
sleeping beauty galaxy instead of
referring to it as the black eye or evil
eye galaxy if it was previously been
called I hope others will adopt this
nomenclature that you're you're not
onboard with her you're more like a evil
eye I think it looks like a black eye I
feel like that just describes it really
well so I don't think that's a bad name
for it sorry Liris she's my hero but
nation you can see in the galaxies
though you can see these really bright
patches all around the ones where we can
see where the dust isn't blocking can
see lots and lots and lots of patches of
star formation so this is a hack it kind
of is I mean it works so I think works
brilliantly in that people more than a
thousand years after he wrote this book
were still using his method to calculate
the positions of planets and it gives
you the right answer